Chapter 12
==========

#### Midterm Exam 11/4/19
##### Covers Chapters 10-13

##### No Class 11/11/19

Recursion
----------

*A recursive method invokes itself directly or indirectly.*
  - Equally powerful substitue for iteration (loops)
  - Excels in cases where simple iteration is insufficient 
  - Requires decomposing problem into simplest case (or base case)

When the recursive method is called with the **base case**, it returns the result.
The recursive function divides complex cases into a known base case and a complex-1 case (or **recursive case**). 
The sequence of reduced complexity must eventually converge on the base case. 
A sequence of returns is then initiated until the initial invocation is reached.
*If complexity is not reduced to base case infinite recursion will occur.*


###Examples

#### Calculating Factorial

*The factorial of a nonnegative integer n, written **n!**
pronounced n-factorial is the product:

```math
n*(n-1)*(n-2)*..*1
```
**e.g. 5! is 5*4*3*2*1 = 120**

```java
public static long fac(long n){
	if(n>1){
		return (n*fac(n-1));
	} else {
		return 1;
	}
}
```

#### Fibonacci Sequence

```math
n = (n-1) + (n-2)
where n>=2
```
So long as n!= 0,1

```java
public static long fib(long n){
	if(n>=2){
		return (fib(n-1)+fib(n-2));
	} else if(n==1){
		return 1;	
	} else {
		return 0;
	}
}
```

#### Palindromes

Can be divided into two subproblems:
  - is first character == last character
  - is f+1 == l-1

```java
public static boolean isPalindrome(String s){
	if(s.length()<=1)
		return true;
	else if(s.charAt(0)!=s.charAt(s.length()-1))
		return false;
	else
		return isPalindrome(s.substring(1,s.length()-1));
}
```

#### Efficiency

Recursive methods can easily become inefficient without adequate memory management,
with variables being reproduced with each recursion. **Recursive Helper Methods** are
overloaded methods which receive additional case parameters reducing computation required. 
*Pass calculated values from intial recursion into overloaded helper method.*

```java
// from the original recursive call in isPalindrome(String s)
// return isPalindrome(s, 0, s.length()-1)
// it is no longer necessary to pass a substring
// but increment/decrement ints low/high

public static boolean isPalindrome(String s, int low, int high){
	if(high<=low)//base
		return true;
	else if(s.charAt(low)!=s.charAt(high))
		return false;
	else
		return isPalindrome(s, low+1, high-1);
}
```

#### Directory Size

Size of a directory is sum of the sizes of files in the directory. 

d 
|---f
|---f
|---f
---d
   |---f
   |---f
   ---d
      |---f

Size of any directory can be found using java File Objects.

### File Objects
-------------
From java.io pkg

**Methods**
 - canRead()
 - delete()
 - exists()
 - getName()
 - isDirectory()
 - length()
 - listFiles()
 - renameTo()

```java
public static long getSize(File file){
	long size=0;
	if(file.isDirectory()){
		File[] files = file.listFiles();
		for(int i=0; i<files.length; i++){
			size += getSize(files[i]);
		}
	} else {
		size+=file.length();
	}
	return size;
}
```

In General
==========
**Recursion** is an alternative form of program control. 

*Recursion bears substantial overhead.* Whenever a recursive function is invoked,
the system must allocate space for the method's local variables and parameters, 
and keep the call in the stack. This consumes considerable memory. However, it excels
in cases where the problem is inherently recursive. 


*full implementations of any example can be found in chapter directory.*