Chapter 13
==========

### Binary Search

*Natural Ordering*: Rules governing the relative placement of all values of a given type. 

*Comparison Function*: Code that, when given two values **A** and **B** of a given type, decides their relative ordering:

`A < B, A == B, A > B`

The standard way for a Java class to define a comparison function for its *objects* is to define a **compareTo** method. 
For example in the *String* class there is method `public int compareTo(String other)`.

A Call of `A.compareTo(B)` will return a value x:
  - x < 0 : A comes *before* B
  - x > 0 : A comes *after* B
  - x == 0 : A and B are considered *equal*

## Sorting

*Rearranging the values in an array or collection into a specific order.* Usually into their **natural ordering**. Sorting is a fundamental problem in computer
science and can be solved in many ways. Many algorithms which apply to many cases, each with advantages and disadvantages in speed, complexity, threading, resources, etc. 

A primary method of sorting is *comparison based sorting*. In which two elements are compared 'greater, equal, or lesser'. 


### Selection Sort

*Finds the smallest number in the list and places first. It then finds the smallest number remaining and places it second, and so on until the list contains only a single number. 
The number previously occupying the sorted index is swapped with the searched value. Example:

`[0, 1, 6, 9, 3] -> [0, 1, 3, 9, 6] -> [0, 1, 3, 6, 9]`

```java
public static void selectionSort(int[] list){

	for(int i=0; i< list.length; i++){
		int currentMin = list[i];
		int currentMinIndex = i;

		for(int j=i+1; j < list.length; j++){
			if(currentMin > list[j]){
				currentMin = list[j];
				currentMinIndex = j;
			}
		}

		if(currentMinIndex != i){
			list[currentMinIndex] = list[i];
			list[i] = currentMin;
		}
	}
}
```

### Arrays.Sort

Java provides *overloaded sort methods* for sorting an array of int, double, char, short, long, and float in the java.util.Arrays class.
The input array is sorted into natural ordering based on type and object characteristics:

```java
double[] numbers = {6.0, 4.4, 1.9};
java.util.Arrays.sort(numbers);

// [1.9, 4.4, 6.0]

char[] chars ={'a', 'A', '4', 'F'};
java.util.Arrays.sort(chars);

// ['4', 'A', 'F', 'a']

String[] words = {"foo", "bar", "baz", "ball"};
Arrays.sort(words);

// ["ball", "bar", "baz", "foo"]

```

# don't forget to buy coffee

### Collections.sort

The **Collections** classes in java.util also implement a static sort method, sorting the elements of a list. 

```java
String[] words = {"foo", "bar", "baz", "ball"};
ArrayList<String> words2 = new ArrayList<>();

for(String word : words){
	words2.add(word);
}

ArrayList<String> words2 = new ArrayList<>(Arrays.asList(words));
Collections.sort(words2);
System.out.println(words2);
```

### Efficiency

Relative to speed and memory (time and space), *efficiency* is a measure of the use of computing resources by code.
This subject is addressed as *Time and Space Complexity* in data structures. Usually used in reference to run time. 

Assuming all statements have similar runtimes and a method call's runtime is measured by the total of the statements inside the method's body:

```java
statement1;
statement2;
//Runtime '2'

for(int i=0; i<N; i++){
	statement1;
	statement2;
}
//Runtime '2N'

for(int i=0; i<N; i++){
	for(int j=0; j<N; j++){
		statement1;
		statement2;
	}
}
//Runtime 'N^2'
```

### Growth Rates

We measure runtime in proportion to the input data size, **N**. Our *Growth Rate* is the change in runtime as N changes. 
Given an algorithm with `N^3 + N^2, 5N` statements - the highest order term N^3 defines runtime. This is referred to as
*on the order of N^3*, or `O(N^3)`.

#### Binary Search

Binary searches effectively eliminate half of the array elements during each search iteration. The runtime complexity is defined
by the function of halving a series `N/2, N/4, N/8, ...` which is of *logarithmic complexity* or `O(log N)`.

#### Selection Sort

The implementation of selection sort requiring nested for loops determines an N^2 runtime, or `O(N^2)`.